:show-content:

========
Expenses
========

Odoo **Expenses** streamlines the management of expenses. After an employee submits their expenses
in Odoo, they are reviewed by management and accounting teams. Once approved, payments can then be
processed, and disbursed back to the employee for reimbursement.

.. seealso::
   `Odoo Expenses: product page <https://www.odoo.com/app/expenses>`_

Set expense categories
======================

The first step to track expenses is to configure the different types of expenses for the company
(managed as *expense categories* in Odoo). Each category can be as specific or generalized as
needed. Go to :menuselection:`Expenses app --> Configuration --> Expense Categories` to view the
current expensable categories in a default list view.

.. image:: expenses/categories.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Set expense costs on products.

To create a new expense category, click :guilabel:`New`. A product form will appear, with the
description field labeled :guilabel:`Product Name`.

.. note::
   Expense categories are managed like products in Odoo. The expense category form follows the
   standard product form in Odoo, and the information entered is similar. Expense products will be
   referred to as expense categories throughout this document since the main menu refers to these as
   :guilabel:`Expense Categories`.

Only two fields are required, the :guilabel:`Product Name` and the :guilabel:`Unit of Measure`.
Enter the :guilabel:`Product Name` in the field, and select the :guilabel:`Unit of Measure` from the
drop-down menu (most products will be set to :guilabel:`Units`).

.. tip::
   The *Sales* app is where specification on the units of measure are created and edited (e.g.
   units, miles, nights, etc.). Go to :menuselection:`Sales app --> Configuration --> Settings` and
   ensure `Units of Measure` is enabled in the `Product Catalog` section. Click on the
   :guilabel:`Units of Measure` internal link to :doc:`view, create, and edit the units of measure
   <../inventory_and_mrp/inventory/product_management/product_replenishment/uom>`.

.. image:: expenses/new-expense-product.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Set expense costs on products.

The :guilabel:`Cost` field on the product form is populated with a value of `0.00` by default. When
a specific expense should always be reimbursed for a particular price, enter that amount in the
:guilabel:`Cost` field. Otherwise, leave the :guilabel:`Cost` set to `0.00`, and employees will
report the actual cost when submitting an expense report.

.. note::
   The :guilabel:`Cost` field is always visible on the expense category form, but the
   :guilabel:`Sales Price` field is *only* visible if the :guilabel:`Sales Price` is selected under
   the :guilabel:`Re-Invoice Expenses` section. Otherwise, the :guilabel:`Sales Price` field is
   hidden.

.. example::
   Here are some examples for when to set a specific :guilabel:`Cost` on a product vs. leaving the
   :guilabel:`Cost` at `0.00`:

   - **Meals**: set the :guilabel:`Cost` to `0.00`. When an employee logs an expense for a meal,
     they enter the actual amount of the bill and will be reimbursed for that amount. An expense for
     a meal costing $95.23 would equal a reimbursement for $95.23.
   - **Mileage**: set the :guilabel:`Cost` to `0.30`. When an employee logs an expense for
     "mileage", they enter the number of miles driven in the :guilabel:`Quantity` field, and are
     reimbursed 0.30 per mile they entered. An expense for 100 miles would equal a reimbursement for
     $30.00.
   - **Monthly Parking**: set the :guilabel:`Cost` to `75.00`. When an employee logs an expense for
     "monthly parking", the reimbursement would be for $75.00.
   - **Expenses**: set the :guilabel:`Cost` to `0.00`. When an employee logs an expense that is not
     a meal, mileage, or monthly parking, they use the generic :guilabel:`Expenses` product. An
     expense for a laptop costing $350.00 would be logged as an :guilabel:`Expenses` product, and
     the reimbursement would be for $350.00.

Select an :guilabel:`Expense Account` if using the Odoo *Accounting* app. It is recommended to check
with the accounting department to determine the correct account to reference in this field as it
will affect reports.

Set a tax on each product in the :guilabel:`Vendor Taxes` and :guilabel:`Customer Taxes` fields, if
applicable. It is considered good practice to use a tax that is configured with :ref:`Tax Included
in Price <taxes/included-in-price>`. Taxes will be automatically configured if this is set.

.. _expenses/approve:

Approve expenses
================

In Odoo, not just anyone can approve expense reportsâ€” only users with the necessary rights (or
permissions) can. This means that a user must have at least *Team Approver* rights for the
*Expenses* app. Employees with the necessary rights can review expense reports, approve or reject
them, and provide feedback thanks to the integrated communication tool.

To see who has rights to approve, go to the main :menuselection:`Settings` app and click on
:guilabel:`Manage Users`.

.. note::
   If the *Settings* app is not available, then certain rights are not set on the account. Check the
   :guilabel:`Access Rights` tab of a user's card in the :menuselection:`Settings` app. the
   :guilabel:`Administration` section (bottom right of the :guilabel:`Access Rights` tab) is set to
   one of three options:

   - :guilabel:`None (blank)`: the user cannot access the *Settings* app at all.
   - :guilabel:`Access Rights`: the user can only view the :guilabel:`User's & Companies` section of
     the *Settings* app.
   - :guilabel:`Settings`: the user has access to the entire *Settings* app with no restrictions.

   Please refer to :doc:`this document </applications/general/users>` to learn more about managing
   users and their access rights.

Click on an individual to view their card, which displays the :guilabel:`Access Rights` tab in the
default view. Scroll down to the :guilabel:`Human Resources` section. Under :guilabel:`Expenses`,
there are four options:

- :guilabel:`None (blank)`: a blank field means the user has no rights to view or approve expense
  reports, and can only view their own.
- :guilabel:`Team Approver`: the user can only view and approve expense reports for their own
  specific team.
- :guilabel:`All Approver`: the user can view and approve any expense report.
- :guilabel:`Administrator`: the user can view and approve any expense report, as well as access the
  reporting and configuration menus in the *Expenses* app.

Users who are able to approve expense reports (typically managers) can easily view all expense
reports they have access rights to. Go to :menuselection:`Expenses app --> Expense Reports`, and a
list appears with all expense reports that have a status of either :guilabel:`To Submit`,
:guilabel:`Submitted`, :guilabel:`Approved`, :guilabel:`Posted`, or :guilabel:`Done`. Expense
reports with a status of :guilabel:`Refused` are hidden in the default view.

.. image:: expenses/expense-reports-list.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Reports to validate are found on the Reports to Approve page.

When viewing expense reports, there is a panel of filters that can be enabled (or disabled) on the
left side. The three categories where filters can be applied on are :guilabel:`Status`,
:guilabel:`Employee`, and :guilabel:`Company`. To view only expense reports with a particular
status, enable the specific status filter to display the expense reports with only that status.
Disable the specific status filter to hide the reports with that status. To view expense reports for
a particular employee and/or company, enable the specific employee name filter and/or company filter
in the :guilabel:`Employee` and :guilabel:`Company` sections.

Reports can be approved in two ways (individually or several at once), and refused only one way. To
approve multiple expense reports at once, remain in the list view. First, select the reports to
approve by ticking the checkbox next to each report, or tick the checkbox next to
:guilabel:`Employee` to select all the reports in the list.

.. important::
   Only reports with a status of :guilabel:`Submitted` can be approved. It is recommended to only
   display the submitted reports by adjusting the status filter on the left side by only having the
   :guilabel:`Submitted` filter enabled.

   If a report is selected that is unable to be approved, the :guilabel:`Approve Report` button
   does **not** appear, indicating there is a problem with the selected report.

Next, click the :guilabel:`Approve Report` button.

.. image:: expenses/approve-report.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Approve multiple reports by clicking the checkboxes next to each report.

To approve an individual report, click on a report to go to a detailed view of that report. In this
view, several options are presented: :guilabel:`Approve`, :guilabel:`Report in Next Payslip`,
:guilabel:`Refuse`, or :guilabel:`Reset to draft`. Click :guilabel:`Approve` to approve the report.

If :guilabel:`Refuse` is clicked, a pop-up window appears. Enter a brief explanation for the refusal
in the :guilabel:`Reason to Refuse Expense` field, and then click :guilabel:`Refuse`.

.. image:: expenses/refuse-expense.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Send messages in the chatter.

Team managers can easily view all the expense reports for their team members. While in the
:guilabel:`Expense Reports` view, click the drop-down arrow in the right-side of the search box, and
click on :guilabel:`My Team` in the :guilabel:`Filters` section. This presents all the reports for
the manager's team.

.. image:: expenses/my-team-filter.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Select the My Team filter.

.. tip::
   If more information is needed, such as a missing receipt, communication is easy from the chatter.
   In an individual report, simply click :guilabel:`Send message` to open the message text box. Type
   in a message, tagging the proper person (if needed), and post it to the chatter by clicking
   :guilabel:`Send`. The message is posted in the chatter, and the person tagged will be notified
   via email of the message, as well as any followers.

   The only people that can be tagged in a message are *followers*. To see who is a follower, click
   on the :guilabel:`ðŸ‘¤ (person)` icon to display the followers of the expense.

   .. image:: expenses/chatter.png
      :align: center
      :alt: Send messages in the chatter.

.. _expenses/reimburse:

Reimburse employees
===================

After an expense report is posted to an accounting journal, the next step is to reimburse the
employee. To view all the expense reports to pay, go to :menuselection:`Expenses app --> Expense
Reports --> Reports To Pay`.

.. image:: expenses/reports-to-pay.png
   :align: center
   :alt: View reports to pay by clicking on expense reports, then reports to pay.

Just like approvals and posting, expense reports can be paid in two ways (individually or several at
once). To pay multiple expense reports at once, remain in the list view. First, select the reports
to pay by ticking the checkbox next to each report, or tick the checkbox next to
:guilabel:`Employee` to select all the reports in the list. Next, click :guilabel:`Register
Payment`.

.. image:: expenses/register-payment.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Post multiple reports by selecting them, clicking the gear, and then post the entries.

To pay an individual report, click on a report to go to a detailed view of that report. Click
:guilabel:`Register Payment` to pay the employee.

A :guilabel:`Register Payment` pop-up appears, and the :guilabel:`Journal`, :guilabel:`Payment
Method`, and :guilabel:`Payment Date` can be modified, if needed. When the selections are correct,
click :guilabel:`Create Payment` to send the payment to the employee.

To pay an individual report, click on a report in the list view to go to a detailed view of that
report. Click :guilabel:`Register Payment` to pay the employee. A :guilabel:`Register Payment`
pop-up appears, but when paying an individual expense report instead of several at once, more
options appear in the pop-up. In addition to the :guilabel:`Journal`, :guilabel:`Payment Method`,
and :guilabel:`Payment Date` fields, a :guilabel:`Recipient Bank Account`, :guilabel:`Amount`, and
:guilabel:`Memo` field appear. Select the employee's bank account from the drop-down menu to
directly deposit the payment to their account. When all other selections are correct, click
:guilabel:`Create Payment` to send the payment to the employee.

.. image:: expenses/two-payment-posting-options.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Different options appear when registering an individual expense report versus multiple
         expense reports at once.

Re-invoice expenses to customers
================================

If expenses are tracked on customer projects, expenses can be automatically charged back to the
customer. This is done by creating an expense, referencing the :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)` the expense
should be added to, and then creating the expense report. Next, managers approve the expense report,
and the accounting department posts the journal entries. Finally, once the expense report is posted
to a journal, the expenses appear on the :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)` that was referenced. The sales
order can then be invoiced, thus invoicing the customer for the expense.

Setup
-----

First, specify the invoicing policy for each expense category. Go to :menuselection:`Expenses app
--> Configuration --> Expense Categories`. Click on the expense category to open the expense
category form. Under the :guilabel:`Invoicing` section, click the radio button next to the desired
selection for :guilabel:`Re-Invoicing Expenses`. Options are :guilabel:`None`, :guilabel:`At cost`,
and :guilabel:`Sales price`.

:guilabel:`Re-Invoicing Expenses`:

- :guilabel:`None`: Expense category will not be re-invoiced.
- :guilabel:`At cost`: Expense category will invoice expenses at their real cost.
- :guilabel:`At sales price`: Expense category will invoice the price set on the sale order.

Create an expense
-----------------

First, when :doc:`creating a new expense <expenses/log_expenses>`, the correct information needs to
be entered in order to re-invoice a customer. Select the *sales order* the expense will appear on in
the :guilabel:`Customer to Reinvoice` section, from the drop-down menu. Next, select the
:guilabel:`Analytic Account` the expense will be posted to. After the expense(s) are created, the
expense report needs to be :doc:`created <expenses/expense_reports>` and :ref:`submitted
<expenses/submit>` as usual.

.. image:: expenses/reinvoice-expense.png
   :align: center
   :alt: Ensure the customer to be invoiced is called out on the expense.

.. important::
   Selecting a :guilabel:`Customer to Reinvoice` when creating an expense is critical, since this is
   what causes the expenses to be automatically invoiced after an expense report is approved.

   The :guilabel:`Customer to Reinvoice` field can be modified *until an expense report is*
   **approved**, then the field is no longer able to be modified.

Validate and post expenses
--------------------------

Only employees with permissions (typically, managers or supervisors) can :ref:`approve expenses
<expenses/approve>`. Before approving an expense report, ensure the :guilabel:`Analytic
Distribution` is set on every expense line of a report. If an :guilabel:`Analytic Distribution` is
missing, assign the correct accounts from the drop-down menu, and click :guilabel:`Approve` or
:guilabel:`Refuse`.

The accounting department is typically responsible for :doc:`posting journal entries
<expenses/post_expenses>`. Once an expense report is approved, it can then be posted. The :abbr:`SO
(Sales Order)` is **only** updated *after* the journal entries are posted. Once the journal entries
are posted, the expenses now appear on the referenced :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)`.

Invoice expenses
----------------

Once the :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)` has been updated, it is time to invoice the customer. After the
expense report has been approved and the journal entries have been posted, click the
:guilabel:`Sales Orders` smart button to open the :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)`. The expenses to be
re-invoiced are now on the :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)`.

.. image:: expenses/sales-order.png
   :align: center
   :alt: After the expense report is posted to the journal entry, the sales order can be called up
         by clicking on the sales order number.

.. note::
   More than one :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)` can be referenced on an expense report. If more than one
   :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)` is referenced, the :guilabel:`Sales Orders` smart button will list the
   number of :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)`'s. If multiple :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)`'s are listed, the
   :guilabel:`Sales Orders` smart button opens a list view of all the :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)`'s on
   the expense report. Click on a :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)` to open the individual :abbr:`SO (Sales
   Order)`.

The expenses are listed in the :abbr:`SO (Sales Order)` :guilabel:`Order Lines` tab.

.. image:: expenses/so-details.png
   :align: center
   :alt: See the expenses listed on the sales order after clicking into it.

Next, click :guilabel:`Create Invoice`, and select if the invoice is for a :guilabel:`Regular
invoice`, a :guilabel:`Down payment (percentage)`, or a :guilabel:`Down payment (fixed amount)` by
clicking the radio button next to it. Then, click :guilabel:`Create Invoice`. The customer has now
been invoiced for the expenses.

.. seealso::
   - expenses/log_expenses
   - :doc:`expenses/post_expenses`
   - :doc:`expenses/expense_reports`

.. toctree::
   :titlesonly:

   expenses/log_expenses
   expenses/post_expenses
   expenses/expense_reports
